Your instinct is right but the layer you're thinking of (memory addresses) is actually RAM — this is about storage, which goes through a different
  subsystem. Let me build it up from scratch.

  ---
  The fundamental problem

  A CPU can only execute instructions and access RAM. A disk (SSD, HDD) is just a device that stores bytes — the CPU has no native way to "run" something
  from a disk or "read a file". There needs to be a translation layer between "bytes on a physical device" and "something a program can use".

  ---
  Block devices: the disk's raw interface

  The kernel exposes every storage device as a block device — a file in /dev like /dev/sda or /dev/nvme0n1. From the kernel's perspective, a block device is
   just a flat sequence of fixed-size chunks (blocks, typically 4KB). You can read block 0, write block 1000, etc. There is no concept of files,
  directories, or names at this level. Just numbered blocks.

  /dev/sda: [ block 0 | block 1 | block 2 | ... | block N ]

  A program that reads /dev/sda directly gets raw bytes. Meaningless without context.

  ---
  Filesystems: giving structure to raw blocks

  A filesystem (ext4, FAT32, NTFS, etc.) is a specification for how to organize those raw blocks so they represent files and directories. It defines:

  - which blocks store metadata (inode tables — file names, sizes, permissions, timestamps)
  - which blocks store actual file contents
  - how to navigate from a directory name to the blocks containing its files

  When you format a partition (mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda1), you're writing that structure onto the raw blocks. The kernel's filesystem driver (a kernel module)
  knows how to read and write that structure.

  So the chain is:

  program wants to read "file.txt"
    → filesystem driver interprets the blocks on /dev/sda1
    → finds the inode for file.txt
    → reads the data blocks
    → returns bytes to the program

  ---
  The VFS: one interface for all filesystems

  Linux has dozens of filesystem types. Programs shouldn't need to care which one they're on. So the kernel has a Virtual Filesystem Switch (VFS) — an
  abstraction layer that presents a uniform interface (open, read, write, stat) regardless of what's underneath.

  Every filesystem driver registers itself with the VFS. When you call open("/home/gonzalo/file.txt"), the VFS figures out which filesystem driver owns that
   path and delegates to it. The program never knows if it's on ext4, NFS, or a RAM-based tmpfs.

  ---
  Mounting: attaching a filesystem to the tree

  Linux has a single unified directory tree starting at /. There are no drive letters like Windows. Every device's filesystem gets attached to a directory
  in that tree — this is mounting.

  mount -t ext4 /dev/sda1 /home

  This tells the kernel: "take the ext4 filesystem on /dev/sda1 and make it appear at /home". After this, navigating into /home causes the kernel to hand
  off to the ext4 driver reading from /dev/sda1.

  The directory used as the attachment point (/home) is the mountpoint. What was previously visible at /home is hidden while the mount is active — the
  device's contents take over.

  The kernel maintains a mount table — a list of (device, filesystem_type, mountpoint) entries. Every path resolution consults this table to figure out
  which filesystem driver to call.

  ---
  Bind mounts: the interesting case

  A normal mount attaches a device to a path. A bind mount attaches an existing directory to another path:

  mount --bind /data/mariadb /var/lib/mysql

  No device involved. The kernel creates a second entry in the mount table pointing to the same underlying filesystem subtree. Both paths now resolve to the
   same inodes — the same actual files. This isn't a copy or a symlink. It's the same filesystem nodes appearing at two locations in the tree
  simultaneously.

  Why is this possible? Because path resolution and inode resolution are separate steps in the VFS. A path is just a way to navigate to an inode. Two paths
  can reach the same inode. A bind mount makes a whole directory subtree reachable from a second path.

  This is what Docker uses for bind mounts and volume mounts — the container gets its own filesystem namespace (more on that below), and the host directory
  is bound into it.

  ---
  Namespaces: how containers get their own filesystem view

  Here's where Docker ties in. Linux has mount namespaces — each process (or group of processes) can have its own private mount table. Changes to mounts in
  one namespace don't affect others.

  When Docker creates a container:
  1. It creates a new mount namespace for the container's processes
  2. It sets up a root filesystem for the container (the image layers, via overlayfs)
  3. It bind-mounts any volumes into that namespace at the specified paths

  The container's processes see a completely different filesystem tree than the host. /var/lib/mysql inside the container is a bind mount of your host
  directory, but only visible within that namespace. The host still sees it at its original path. Other containers see neither unless explicitly configured.

  ---
  So your original instinct

  You said "the OS talking to the memory handler in the kernel about memory addresses" — that's actually describing virtual memory, which is the RAM-side
  story (page tables, MMU, address spaces). Storage goes through a parallel but separate hierarchy: VFS → filesystem driver → block layer → device driver →
  physical hardware. They meet only when the kernel needs to load executable code or do memory-mapped I/O, but for regular file reads/writes they're
  independent subsystems.

  The complexity of "attaching memory to a path" is really the complexity of the VFS indirection — the kernel needs to resolve any path to a specific
  filesystem driver, and that mapping (the mount table) is what mount manipulates.

✻ Sautéed for 35s

❯ Alright, that was valuable, but I think I still need a few pieces to put together the puzzle here.

  So, we've got a memory (HDD, SSD)
  -> we first set what will be the format we will use to store data in this memory (we format the memory into ext4, FAT32, etc.)
  -> now we have a memory in a specific format, ready to be mounted
  -> When we power the kernel, it has VFS to deal with any type of memory format we decide to use. We need to mount this block of memory somewhere. The
  linux kernel has everything mounted to one root '/'.
  #1 Here comes the first question.. what IS the root? where is '/' stored, or mounted on? Assuming we have a small piece of memory for the mounting of the
   OS while we leave the majority of our HDD for personal files, we still need to mount that memory.
  #2 Then we decide to mount the second partition to /dev/sda1, but what does that mean? What is a folder in for the kernel and how does that relate to the
   partition we are mounting? I assume that one thing has nothing to do with the other, but I was confused with your explanation.
  #3 Additionally, we can mount binding the same memory that is already "physically" mounted to another folder. My first instinct is that this is basically
   saving a pointer in another folder. The data "deferenced" is exactly the same (not a copy), but what we are doing is basically saving a pointer in
  another folder. I thought that that was exactly what a link was.

● All three questions are great and they connect to each other. Let me take them one at a time.

  ---
  #1 Where is / stored?

  / is stored on a partition, just like everything else. The difference is that the kernel is told which partition it is at boot time — it's a parameter
  passed by the bootloader (GRUB, for example).

  The sequence:

  1. Machine powers on, BIOS/UEFI runs
  2. BIOS finds the bootloader on a small reserved area of the disk
  3. Bootloader loads the kernel into RAM and passes it parameters — one of which is root=/dev/sda1 (or similar)
  4. The kernel mounts that partition as / directly, as its first act
  5. Everything else is mounted on top of that tree afterward

  So / is not special in terms of storage — it's just the first mount, the one the kernel does before userspace exists. After that, other partitions get
  mounted at subdirectories of that tree.

  ---
  #2 What does "mounting to /dev/sda1" actually mean — and what is a folder?

  First, a small correction to your phrasing (and my earlier one): you don't mount to /dev/sda1, you mount from it. /dev/sda1 is the source (the device),
  and a directory like /home is the destination (the mountpoint).

  Now: what is a folder to the kernel?

  A folder (directory) is just an inode — a data structure on disk that contains a list of name→inode mappings. That's it. A directory named home in the
  root inode's list just says "the name 'home' points to inode #482" or whatever. There's no inherent meaning, no reserved space, no connection to any
  device. It's just a name in a list.

  When you mount /dev/sda1 at /home, the kernel does not store anything in that directory inode. Instead, it adds an entry to its mount table in memory:

  device: /dev/sda1   filesystem: ext4   mountpoint: /home

  From this point on, when any process tries to resolve a path that goes through /home, the VFS checks the mount table, sees there's a mount there, and
  hands off path resolution to the ext4 driver reading from /dev/sda1. The original /home directory inode on the root partition is completely bypassed —
  it's shadowed.

  So the relationship between the folder and the partition is: zero, structurally. The folder is just a landmark in the tree where the kernel inserts a
  redirection. The partition could be mounted at /banana if you wanted. The name is for humans.

  ---
  #3 Bind mount vs link — your pointer instinct

  Your instinct is exactly right, but you need to know there are two kinds of links in Linux, and a bind mount is neither — though it resembles one of them
  more than the other.

  Hard link: two directory entries (names) pointing to the same inode. Truly the same file, no indirection — both names are equal, neither is "the
  original". Works only within the same filesystem (because inode numbers are local to a filesystem).

  Symbolic link (symlink): a special inode whose content is a path string. When the kernel resolves a symlink it reads that string and starts a new path
  resolution from it. It's a pointer to a name, not to an inode. The target can be on a different filesystem, can be relative, can be broken if the target
  is deleted.

  Bind mount: not stored on disk at all. It's an entry in the kernel's in-memory mount table that says "when path resolution enters this directory, redirect
   to this other subtree". It works at the VFS layer, above filesystems. It can cross filesystem boundaries, and it applies to the entire subtree — not just
   one file.

  The key difference from a symlink: a symlink is resolved by the process, in userspace, by following a path. A bind mount is transparent — processes have
  no idea it exists. readlink on a bind-mounted directory returns nothing. stat on files inside it shows the real inode numbers. To a process, the bind
  mount just looks like a normal directory.

  So the hierarchy of "sameness":

  hard link    → same inode, same filesystem, stored on disk
  symlink      → pointer to a path string, stored on disk, visible to processes
  bind mount   → VFS-level redirection, in memory only, invisible to processes

  All three give you "two paths, same data" — but at completely different layers.

❯ Alright, a few more questions:

  #1 - It is still confusing to see you are mounting something on /home for example but taking the "address" of the memory fomr /dev/sda1 like the memory
  is already mounted there. It is almost like you are doing a bind mount, not a physical mounting.
  #2 - I think I get the difference now:
  hard link: two different places store the address of some data
  symlink: I store a piece of data which the value is the address of another data
  bind mount: it is like a yellow list page for each folder? If the folder has an entry there, show what the folder has + what you see listed in the yellow
   pages here. Long shot comparisson?
  #3 - When you explain now in your answer devide the two scenarios:
     A) we are creating a new machine and need to mount an unmounted block of memory
     B) we are turning on a machine with memory already physically mounted. We just show the process of turning the machine on and how the kernel treast
  the records of memory already mounted

● #1 — /dev/sda1 is itself a mount

  You caught something real. /dev is not magic — it's also a mounted filesystem. Early in boot, the kernel mounts a special virtual filesystem called
  devtmpfs at /dev. The kernel populates it automatically with entries for every device it detects: disks, USB devices, GPUs, etc.

  So /dev/sda1 is a file (a device file, specifically a block device file) that the kernel created in that virtual filesystem. It's not the disk "living
  there" — it's a reference to it. The file contains a major:minor number pair, which is how the kernel identifies which device driver handles it.

  /dev/sda1  →  major:minor (8:1)  →  kernel finds the block device driver for "sda1"

  So when you write mount /dev/sda1 /home, you're saying: "find the device identified by that file, read its filesystem, attach it at /home." The /dev/sda1
  file is a handle, not the storage itself. Your instinct was right — it does feel like a level of indirection, because it is.

  ---
  #2 — Your comparisons

  Hard link: yes, exactly. Two directory entries (names), same inode address. Neither is more "real" than the other.

  Symlink: yes. The inode's data content is a path string. The kernel dereferences it automatically during path resolution.

  Bind mount: close, but I'd sharpen it. It's not per-folder data, it's a single kernel-level table. Think of it less like yellow pages attached to each
  folder and more like a customs checkpoint at a border: when path resolution crosses into that directory, the kernel intercepts it and reroutes it to a
  different subtree entirely. The original directory is bypassed, not augmented. You don't see the original contents plus the mount — you see only the
  mounted thing. The original is hidden underneath.

  ---
  #3A — Fresh machine, unmounted block of memory

  You have a brand new disk. It has no filesystem, just raw blocks.

  Step 1: partition it
  You decide to split it into two regions. You write a partition table (MBR or GPT) to block 0 — a small data structure that says "region 1 goes from block
  0 to block X, region 2 from block X+1 to block N". The kernel reads this and exposes /dev/sda1 and /dev/sda2 in /dev.

  Step 2: format each partition
  mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda1
  mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda2
  This writes the filesystem structure onto those raw blocks — inode tables, block group descriptors, an empty root directory. The partition is now
  interpretable.

  Step 3: mount
  mount -t ext4 /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot
  mount -t ext4 /dev/sda2 /mnt/data
  The kernel adds entries to the mount table. Both partitions are now accessible as directory trees.

  Before step 3, the data exists on disk but is unreachable through the filesystem tree. Mounting is the act of making it reachable.

  ---
  #3B — Existing machine, powering on

  The disk already has partitions and filesystems written. Nothing needs to be formatted. The kernel just needs to reconstruct the mount table from scratch,
   because the mount table is in RAM — it does not persist across reboots.

  The sequence:

  1. BIOS/UEFI runs from firmware, finds the bootloader on the disk
  2. Bootloader (GRUB) loads the kernel binary into RAM, passes it parameters including root=/dev/sda1
  3. Kernel initializes: sets up memory management, device drivers, detects hardware
  4. Kernel mounts /: using the root= parameter, it mounts /dev/sda1 as the root filesystem — this is the first and only hardcoded mount, done before any
  config files are read
  5. Kernel starts init (PID 1, e.g. systemd) — first userspace process
  6. systemd reads /etc/fstab: this file is the persistent record of "what should be mounted where". It lists every partition, its mountpoint, filesystem
  type, and options
  7. systemd mounts everything in fstab: each line becomes a mount call, populating the mount table
  8. System is ready

  /etc/fstab is the answer to "how does the machine remember what was mounted". The mount table itself evaporates on shutdown — fstab is the durable record
  that gets replayed on every boot.

  Docker volumes with driver: local and bind mounts follow the same principle: Docker reconstructs them each time the daemon starts, based on its own stored
   configuration (in /var/lib/docker), not fstab.

❯ Perfect, #1 makes sense now.
  Interesting analogy for bind mounting. But than, if mounting such a hard reroute of the folder, what is the difference between a physical mounting and a
  bind mounting? Both of them have the same effect to the folder, right? And if the mounting is redone on startup, it doesn't do anything to the memory
  itself, so bind mounting and physical mounting appear indistinguishable.

  And now, finally getting back to Docker, if we mount a folder to a container, that container will be able to use the folder to store whatever it needs;
  but if a host process want to access the sasme folder the container is mounted on, it will be able to see the data stored there right? So why is this
  important, mounting I mean?

● Bind vs physical mount — the difference

  You're right that the effect on the process is identical — both make a filesystem tree appear at a path, both are reconstructed on boot, both are
  invisible to processes using them. The difference is in what the kernel is connecting:

  - Physical mount: kernel connects a block device → reads a filesystem from raw blocks → exposes it at a path. Something new enters the tree that wasn't
  there before.
  - Bind mount: kernel connects an already-mounted subtree → no reading of raw blocks → exposes the same data at a second path. Nothing new enters the tree,
   just a second window into something already there.

  The distinction matters at the kernel level (different code paths, different mount flags) but you're right that from a user/process perspective they're
  indistinguishable. A process navigating /var/lib/mysql has no idea if it got there via a physical mount or a bind mount.

  ---
  Why mounting matters for Docker

  Your instinct is also right here — a host process can access the data in a bind-mounted folder. Open a terminal and ls /home/gonzalo/.../mariadb while the
   container is running and you'll see MariaDB's files sitting there.

  So why does mounting matter? A few reasons:

  Persistence: without a volume, container writes go into the container's writable layer — an overlay filesystem that lives inside /var/lib/docker. When the
   container is removed, that layer is deleted. The data is gone. With a volume, writes go to your host directory. Container dies, data survives.

  Sharing between containers: two containers can mount the same host directory and read each other's files. This is how WordPress talks to its file storage
  while a backup container reads the same files.

  Separation of image and state: your Dockerfile defines the application — the binary, the config, the dependencies. The volume holds the data the
  application produces at runtime. This separation means you can rebuild the image (upgrade MariaDB version, change config) without touching the data. Image
   and state have independent lifecycles.

  The host access you described is actually useful: you can inspect, backup, or edit the data directly on the host without going through Docker at all. For
  debugging this is very practical.

  So mounting isn't about restricting access or creating isolation — it's about giving the container a place to write that outlives the container itself.
